First, I identified a dataset to use from kaggle.com. I searched for beginner friendly datasets and found a list of datasets to choose from. I chose the dataset “80 cereals” and downloaded the csv file. Then, I opened the file to examine the headings in the dataset in order to see which fields were included. I needed to come up with a research question related to the fields in the dataset. Since this assignment requires analysis of one categorical variable and one numerical variable, I found out that the categorical variable in the dataset is the cereal manufacturer. There are many numerical values in the dataset, but I chose to examine the grams of sugars. My research question became, “Do General Mills cereals have higher sugar content than Kellogg’s cereals?”

A T-test would be appropriate because it examines a small sample size when the variance is unknown. Here I’m trying to determine the variance in grams of sugar between General Mills cereals and Kellogg’s cereals.

Next, I identified the hypotheses. The null hypothesis (H0) is that sugar content does not differ significantly between General Mills cereals and Kellogg’s cereals. My alternate hypothesis (H1) is that the mean sugar content in General Mills cereals is greater than the mean sugar content in Kellogg’s cereals This indicates a one-tailed test or a right-tailed test, since the question is asking if General Mills contains more sugar.

After determining what I wanted to analyze, I uploaded the csv file to R studio to perform statistical analysis. The example Week 9 Activity Rmd file was particularly useful during this process and I referenced it frequently to examine the R code. I also looked back at Assignment 1 to help with the initial loading and cleaning of the data, then I followed the analysis steps from Activity 9. First I separated the sugars by manufacturer and named the subsets gm_sugar and k_sugar. I also calculated the means and standard deviations for both groups.

I followed the steps shown in the WK9 Activity and essentially just plugged in the variables from my own dataset. After running the Z-test, I could see that Z=0, which means that the data point was exactly equal to the mean of the data. When I visualized this Z-test, I could see that the data point was beyond the area shaded red, so that means I would fail to reject my null hypothesis. This suggests that the amount of sugar in General Mills cereal is not a statistically significant amount more than Kellogg’s cereal. This outcome is shown again using a T-test, where the t value lies outside of the area that would reject the null hypothesis.

During my visualization of the chi-square test, my value falls way outside of the curve, so I think that something went wrong or that this test isn’t the best choice for the data or question I am using. I’m not sure how to trouble shoot what might have gone wrong here, but the result doesn’t seem to align with the Z and T tests.

The boxplot displayed after the ANOVA test helped me visualize the amount of sugar from all manufacturers, and I think I know why I didn’t receive statistically significant results comparing General Mills and Kellogg’s - because their ranges of data are very similar. Kellogg’s makes cereals that have both more and less sugar than General Mills. The manufacturer with the least amount of sugar was actually Nabisco.
As my results indicate, I must fail to reject the null hypothesis. There does not appear to be a statistically significant difference between the amount of sugars in General Mills cereals and the amount of sugars in Kellogg’s cereals. Therefore my alternate hypothesis, that General Mills contains more sugar, is false.
